Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: neuromuscular monitoring.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is neuromuscular monitoring, and why is it important?
Neuromuscular monitoring is the objective measurement of the degree of
neuromuscular block produced by neuromuscular blocking drugs,
achieved by stimulating a peripheral motor nerve electrically and measuring the
resulting muscle response, and it is important because it is the only reliable way
to assess the depth of block and, critically,
to confirm its full reversal before the patient is woken.
When a neuromuscular blocking drug is given,
it blocks transmission at the neuromuscular junction,
producing paralysis whose depth varies over time with the dose and the drug's
pharmacology and the patient's individual response;
clinical signs alone are an unreliable guide to this depth.
Neuromuscular monitoring allows the anaesthetist to assess the depth of block
during surgery, to titrate further doses of relaxant,
to time and confirm the adequacy of reversal, and, most importantly,
to detect and prevent residual neuromuscular block at the end of anaesthesia.
Residual block — incomplete recovery of neuromuscular function at extubation — is
common, dangerous and often undetectable clinically, impairing the airway,
ventilation and the ability to protect against aspiration,
and increasing postoperative respiratory complications;
objective monitoring is the only reliable means of excluding it.
For these reasons quantitative neuromuscular monitoring whenever a neuromuscular
blocking drug is used is strongly recommended as a standard of care.
So neuromuscular monitoring objectively measures the depth of neuromuscular block
by stimulating a motor nerve and measuring the muscle response;
it is important to assess and titrate block during surgery and, above all,
to confirm full reversal and exclude the common,
dangerous and clinically undetectable residual block before waking the patient.
On what principle does the nerve stimulator work?
The principle of neuromuscular monitoring is to apply a standardised electrical
stimulus to a peripheral motor nerve and to assess the resulting contraction of the
muscle it supplies, the size of the response reflecting the proportion of
neuromuscular junctions still able to transmit,
and understanding the requirements of the stimulus is fundamental to reliable
monitoring.
A peripheral nerve stimulator delivers an electrical current through two electrodes
placed over a superficial motor nerve; the current depolarises the nerve,
generating action potentials that travel to the muscle and evoke a contraction,
the twitch.
For the response to reflect the degree of block reliably,
the stimulus must be supramaximal — that is,
of a current greater than that needed to excite every nerve fibre in the nerve,
so that the maximal possible number of muscle fibres is activated and the response
depends only on how many junctions are blocked,
not on whether all fibres were stimulated.
The stimulus is a brief, square, monophasic pulse,
conventionally of about zero point two milliseconds duration,
short enough to excite the nerve once without directly stimulating the muscle or
causing repetitive firing.
The current required is typically fifty to sixty milliamps or more.
The response — the evoked muscle contraction — is then assessed, by feel or sight,
or, better, measured objectively. The degree of block is judged from the reduction
and pattern of the responses.
So the nerve stimulator works by delivering a supramaximal, brief,
square electrical pulse to a peripheral motor nerve,
exciting all its fibres so that the evoked muscle contraction reflects only the
proportion of junctions still transmitting;
the response is then assessed or measured,
and the degree of block judged from its reduction and pattern.
Describe the patterns of stimulation used.
Several distinct patterns of electrical stimulation are used in neuromuscular
monitoring, each giving particular information about the depth and nature of the
block, and knowing them is essential to using the monitor and interpreting the
results.
The single twitch is a single stimulus,
usually at one hertz or zero point one hertz, evoking a single contraction;
comparing its height to a pre-block control indicates the degree of block,
but it requires a control and is relatively insensitive.
The train-of-four, the most widely used pattern,
delivers four stimuli at two hertz over two seconds;
in a non-depolarising block the successive responses fade in a characteristic way,
and the ratio of the fourth to the first response, the train-of-four ratio,
and the number of palpable responses, the train-of-four count,
quantify the block without needing a control.
Tetanic stimulation delivers a sustained high-frequency stimulus,
typically fifty hertz for five seconds, provoking a sustained contraction;
in non-depolarising block this is not sustained but fades,
and tetanus is followed by post-tetanic potentiation.
Post-tetanic count, used in deep block when there is no response to train-of-four,
applies a tetanus and then single twitches,
counting the post-tetanic responses to gauge very deep block.
Double-burst stimulation delivers two short bursts of tetanus,
making fade easier to feel than train-of-four.
Each pattern suits a different depth and purpose.
So the patterns are the single twitch, needing a control; the train-of-four,
four stimuli at two hertz quantifying block by fade without a control;
tetanic stimulation revealing fade; the post-tetanic count for very deep block;
and double-burst stimulation making fade easier to detect — each suited to a
particular depth and question.
Explain the train-of-four in detail and its interpretation.
The train-of-four is the most important and widely used pattern of stimulation,
and a detailed understanding of it and its interpretation is central to
neuromuscular monitoring, because it allows the depth of a non-depolarising block
to be quantified at the bedside without a pre-block control.
The train-of-four consists of four supramaximal stimuli delivered at a frequency of
two hertz, that is, two seconds apart over the train, evoking four twitches.
In the absence of block, all four responses are of equal height.
In a partial non-depolarising block,
the responses progressively diminish across the train — the phenomenon of fade — so
that the fourth response is smaller than the first;
this fade occurs because the non-depolarising drug,
by blocking the presynaptic acetylcholine receptors that normally sustain
transmitter release during repetitive stimulation,
impairs the mobilisation of acetylcholine, so each successive response is weaker.
Two measures are derived. The train-of-four ratio is the height of the fourth
response divided by the first, expressed as a fraction; it falls as block deepens,
and recovers toward one as block wanes,
a ratio of less than zero point nine indicating significant residual block.
The train-of-four count is simply the number of palpable or visible responses,
from four down to zero; as block deepens,
the responses disappear from the fourth backwards, so a count of, say,
one or two indicates a deeper block suitable for surgery.
Importantly, fade requires no control value, since it is a ratio within the train.
So the train-of-four delivers four stimuli at two hertz;
in non-depolarising block the responses fade, the fourth being smallest,
owing to impaired presynaptic acetylcholine mobilisation;
the train-of-four ratio of fourth to first quantifies recovery,
with less than zero point nine indicating residual block,
and the count of responses gauges depth, needing no pre-block control.
How does the pattern of response differ between depolarising and non-depolarising
block?
The patterns of response to stimulation differ in a characteristic and
diagnostically important way between depolarising and non-depolarising
neuromuscular block, and understanding this difference allows the type of block to
be identified and the unusual phase-two block of suxamethonium to be recognised.
In a non-depolarising block, produced by the competitive agents,
the responses to repetitive stimulation show fade:
the train-of-four shows progressive diminution of the four responses,
with a reduced train-of-four ratio,
and tetanic stimulation is not sustained but fades,
followed by post-tetanic potentiation — a transient enhancement of the twitch after
a tetanus, because the tetanus mobilises acetylcholine.
These phenomena of fade and post-tetanic potentiation are the hallmark of
non-depolarising block and arise from the block of presynaptic receptors.
In a normal depolarising, or phase-one, block, produced by suxamethonium,
the responses are quite different: there is no fade,
the train-of-four responses being reduced but all equally so,
the train-of-four ratio remaining near one;
tetanic stimulation is sustained without fade;
and there is no post-tetanic potentiation.
This is because the depolarising agent acts purely postsynaptically by persistent
depolarisation.
However, with large or repeated doses of suxamethonium the block may change its
character to a phase-two, or dual, block that resembles a non-depolarising block,
showing fade and post-tetanic potentiation.
So non-depolarising block shows fade and post-tetanic potentiation,
the hallmark of competitive block; normal depolarising phase-one block shows
reduced but equal responses without fade or potentiation;
and a phase-two block from excessive suxamethonium acquires the fade of a
non-depolarising block — allowing the type and phase of block to be identified.
Which nerves and muscles are used, and what are the considerations?
The choice of nerve to stimulate and muscle to monitor is an important practical
aspect of neuromuscular monitoring,
because different muscles vary in their sensitivity to block and in how well they
reflect the muscles whose function matters clinically,
and the site must be accessible and reliable.
The most commonly used site is the ulnar nerve at the wrist,
stimulated by electrodes over its course,
evoking contraction of the adductor pollicis muscle, which adducts the thumb;
this site is accessible, gives a clear, measurable response,
and the adductor pollicis is well characterised,
making it the standard for monitoring and for confirming recovery.
Alternative sites include the facial nerve,
monitoring the orbicularis oculi or corrugator supercilii around the eye,
and the posterior tibial nerve at the ankle, monitoring the flexor hallucis.
An important consideration is that muscles differ in sensitivity: the diaphragm,
the larynx and the other central, airway-related muscles are relatively resistant
to block, recovering earlier, while the peripheral adductor pollicis is more
sensitive and recovers later.
This means the adductor pollicis is a conservative,
safe site for confirming recovery — if it has recovered,
the airway muscles have certainly recovered — whereas the facial muscles,
behaving more like the airway muscles,
may overestimate recovery of the adductor pollicis and so should not be used to
confirm full recovery.
The thumb must be free to move and the response measured at the adductor pollicis.
So the ulnar nerve at the wrist, evoking adductor pollicis contraction,
is the standard site, accessible and conservative for confirming recovery;
the facial and tibial nerves are alternatives, but the facial muscles,
resembling the resistant airway muscles,
overestimate recovery and should not be used to confirm it — the sensitive adductor
pollicis being the safe site.
How is the muscle response measured objectively?
Although the muscle response to stimulation can be assessed subjectively by feeling
or watching the twitch, objective, quantitative measurement of the response is
greatly superior and is necessary to detect residual block reliably,
and understanding the methods of objective measurement explains why quantitative
monitoring is recommended.
Subjective assessment — feeling the strength of the thumb adduction or watching it,
and judging fade by hand — is unreliable,
because the human hand and eye cannot reliably detect fade once the train-of-four
ratio exceeds about zero point four,
so significant residual block with a ratio between zero point four and zero point
nine is missed; subjective assessment therefore cannot confirm adequate recovery.
Objective monitoring measures the response quantitatively and displays the
train-of-four ratio as a number. There are several methods.
Acceleromyography measures the acceleration of the moving thumb with a small
piezoelectric accelerometer, since by Newton's law acceleration is proportional to
force; it is simple and widely used.
Electromyography measures the electrical compound action potential of the muscle
evoked by the stimulus, a direct measure of activation.
Mechanomyography, the research standard,
measures the actual force of contraction with a transducer under controlled tension.
Kinemyography measures the bending of a piezoelectric strip in the moving thumb.
Each gives a numerical train-of-four ratio,
allowing recovery to be confirmed objectively at a ratio of zero point nine or
above.
So objective measurement is necessary because subjective assessment cannot detect
fade above a ratio of about zero point four, missing residual block;
objective methods — acceleromyography measuring thumb acceleration,
electromyography measuring the muscle action potential,
mechanomyography measuring force, and kinemyography measuring bending — display the
train-of-four ratio numerically, allowing recovery to be confirmed at a ratio of
zero point nine or above.
What is residual neuromuscular block, and how is adequate recovery defined?
Residual neuromuscular block is the persistence of a clinically significant degree
of neuromuscular block into the recovery period,
and defining it and the criteria for adequate recovery is of central importance,
because residual block is common, dangerous and the principal reason neuromuscular
monitoring is essential.
Residual block is present when neuromuscular function has not fully recovered at
the time of extubation and emergence,
even though the patient may appear to be moving and breathing.
It matters because incomplete recovery impairs the function of the pharyngeal and
airway muscles, causing airway obstruction,
impaired swallowing and a greatly increased risk of aspiration;
it weakens the respiratory muscles,
impairing ventilation and the response to hypoxia and hypercarbia;
and it causes distressing weakness.
These translate into an increased incidence of postoperative airway and respiratory
complications.
The accepted objective criterion for adequate recovery is a train-of-four ratio of
zero point nine or greater, measured objectively at the adductor pollicis;
this threshold was established because below it the pharyngeal and airway function
and the hypoxic ventilatory response remain impaired,
while at zero point nine and above they are essentially restored.
Clinical tests such as a sustained head-lift,
hand-grip or the ability to sustain a tetanus are insensitive and cannot exclude a
ratio below zero point nine, so they are inadequate;
only objective measurement to a ratio of zero point nine confirms adequate recovery.
So residual neuromuscular block is clinically significant incomplete recovery at
emergence, causing airway obstruction, aspiration risk,
impaired ventilation and weakness; adequate recovery is defined as an objectively
measured train-of-four ratio of zero point nine or above at the adductor pollicis,
a threshold that clinical tests cannot reliably confirm,
making objective monitoring necessary.
How is monitoring used to guide reversal of block?
Neuromuscular monitoring is used to guide the reversal of neuromuscular block in a
rational, drug-specific way, and understanding this guides the safe and timely
antagonism of block and the confirmation of its completeness,
which differs between the reversal agents.
With the traditional anticholinesterase reversal, such as neostigmine,
monitoring is essential because neostigmine can only reverse a block that has
already partially recovered — it has a ceiling and cannot antagonise a profound
block — so reversal should not be attempted until there is evidence of spontaneous
recovery, conventionally at least two, and preferably four,
responses to the train-of-four; giving neostigmine when the block is too deep
results in inadequate or delayed reversal.
After giving the reversal, monitoring confirms that recovery proceeds to a
train-of-four ratio of zero point nine before extubation.
With sugammadex, the selective relaxant-binding agent that reverses the
aminosteroid relaxants rocuronium and vecuronium by encapsulation,
monitoring guides the dose: sugammadex can reverse even a profound block,
and the dose is chosen according to the depth — a larger dose for a deeper block,
guided by the post-tetanic count and train-of-four — and monitoring then confirms
full recovery to a ratio of zero point nine.
In both cases monitoring both indicates when and how much reversal to give and
confirms its adequacy, preventing both premature extubation with residual block and
unnecessary delay.
So monitoring guides reversal by indicating when anticholinesterase reversal may be
given — only once spontaneous recovery to two to four train-of-four responses has
appeared, since neostigmine cannot reverse a deep block — and by guiding the
sugammadex dose to the measured depth;
in both cases it then confirms recovery to a train-of-four ratio of zero point nine
before extubation.
How is very deep, intense block monitored?
The monitoring of very deep, or intense,
neuromuscular block — block so profound that there is no response even to the
train-of-four — requires a special pattern, the post-tetanic count,
and understanding it completes the range of monitoring across all depths of block,
which is important when profound block is needed and when judging the timing of
reversal.
When neuromuscular block is very deep,
as is required for certain surgery or shortly after a large dose of relaxant,
the muscle does not respond at all to single-twitch or train-of-four stimulation,
so these patterns show zero responses and cannot distinguish degrees of very deep
block or indicate when recovery will begin.
The post-tetanic count addresses this.
A tetanic stimulus is applied for five seconds, which,
through post-tetanic potentiation, transiently mobilises acetylcholine and enhances
transmission; immediately afterwards, single twitches are applied at one hertz,
and the number of these post-tetanic twitches that are detectable is counted.
In a very deep block, even though there is no train-of-four response,
a few post-tetanic twitches may be elicited,
and the post-tetanic count — the number of these responses — gauges the depth of
the block: a lower count indicates a deeper block.
The post-tetanic count also predicts the time until the first train-of-four
response reappears, allowing the anticipation of recovery.
It is used when a profound block is maintained and to judge when reversal will be
feasible.
So very deep block, with no train-of-four response,
is monitored by the post-tetanic count:
a tetanus is applied to potentiate transmission, then single twitches are counted,
the number of post-tetanic responses gauging the depth of block and predicting the
time to the return of the train-of-four — allowing profound block to be monitored
and recovery anticipated.
What are the sources of error and artefact in neuromuscular monitoring?
Neuromuscular monitoring, though valuable,
is subject to a number of sources of error and artefact,
and an awareness of these is necessary to obtain reliable measurements and to avoid
being misled, since an erroneous reading could result in residual block being
missed or block being misjudged.
A first group concerns the stimulus and electrodes:
an inadequate or non-supramaximal current, from poorly applied,
dried or wrongly placed electrodes, or a flat battery,
gives a falsely reduced or absent response that mimics block;
the electrodes must be correctly placed over the nerve and the current supramaximal.
Direct stimulation of the muscle, if the electrodes are placed over the muscle
rather than the nerve, evokes a contraction even when the junction is blocked,
falsely suggesting recovery.
A second group concerns the patient:
hypothermia and a cold or poorly perfused limb reduce the response and slow the
apparent recovery, and the temperature of the monitored limb affects the reading,
so the limb should be kept warm; oedema and abnormal limb position interfere.
A monitored limb that is the site of a blood-pressure cuff or that is positioned
awkwardly gives errors.
A third group concerns technique: failure to establish a control, where needed;
movement and external interference; and, with acceleromyography,
the need for the thumb to move freely and for a stabilising preload.
Stimulation patterns applied too frequently cause fatigue.
So neuromuscular-monitoring errors arise from an inadequate or non-supramaximal
stimulus from poor electrodes or current,
from direct muscle stimulation falsely suggesting recovery,
from hypothermia and poor perfusion of the monitored limb reducing the response,
and from movement, awkward positioning and improper technique — all to be avoided
by correct electrode placement, a supramaximal current,
a warm freely moving limb and proper technique.
Briefly, how does monitoring differ in special situations such as the eye or with
myasthenia?
Neuromuscular monitoring requires particular consideration in certain special
situations — when using the facial nerve, in neuromuscular disease,
and in particular surgical contexts — and a brief account of these illustrates how
the general principles are applied with appropriate caution.
When the ulnar nerve and adductor pollicis are inaccessible,
the facial nerve is often used, monitoring the orbicularis oculi or corrugator
supercilii; however, as noted, these muscles resemble the resistant airway muscles
and recover earlier than the adductor pollicis,
so while they are acceptable for monitoring the onset and depth of block
intraoperatively and for timing intubation,
they should not be relied upon to confirm full recovery,
for which the adductor pollicis should be used.
In neuromuscular disease the response is altered and monitoring must be interpreted
accordingly: in myasthenia gravis the patient is markedly sensitive to
non-depolarising agents and shows exaggerated block and fade,
so reduced doses and careful monitoring are needed; in the myasthenic,
or Eaton-Lambert, syndrome there is also abnormal sensitivity.
In patients with upper motor neurone lesions or hemiplegia,
the affected limb shows resistance to block, giving a falsely reassuring response,
so an unaffected limb should be monitored. Burns and prolonged immobility also
alter the response.
The principles of supramaximal stimulation and objective measurement remain,
applied with awareness of the altered pharmacology.
So in special situations monitoring is applied with caution:
the facial nerve may monitor onset and depth but not confirm recovery,
for which the adductor pollicis is used;
neuromuscular diseases such as myasthenia alter sensitivity and require careful
interpretation; and a limb affected by an upper motor neurone lesion shows
misleading resistance, so an unaffected limb is monitored.
Summarise the clinical applications of neuromuscular monitoring.
Drawing the uses together, neuromuscular monitoring is applied throughout the
course of neuromuscular block to guide its use and, above all,
to ensure its safe and complete reversal,
and summarising its applications shows why it is regarded as a standard of care
whenever a relaxant is used.
At induction and intubation, monitoring the onset of block by the disappearance of
the train-of-four indicates when intubating conditions are established and the
optimal time to intubate.
During maintenance, monitoring guides the titration of further doses of relaxant to
maintain an appropriate depth of block for the surgery — for example a
train-of-four count of one or two for most procedures,
or a profound block monitored by the post-tetanic count where the surgery demands
complete immobility.
It allows the depth of block to be matched to the surgical need,
avoiding both inadequate relaxation and excessive, prolonged block.
At the end of surgery, monitoring guides the timing and dosing of reversal —
indicating when neostigmine may be given or the appropriate sugammadex dose — and,
most importantly, confirms recovery to a train-of-four ratio of zero point nine
before extubation, excluding residual block.
It identifies the type and phase of block and detects abnormal responses.
Throughout, it individualises management to the patient's variable response.
So neuromuscular monitoring is applied to time intubation by the onset of block,
to titrate the depth of block to the surgical need during maintenance,
to guide the timing and dose of reversal, and, crucially,
to confirm full recovery to a train-of-four ratio of zero point nine before
extubation — individualising management and excluding residual block.
Finally, draw the station together.
Drawing the station together, neuromuscular monitoring is the objective measurement
of the depth of neuromuscular block by stimulating a peripheral motor nerve and
measuring the evoked muscle response,
and it is essential to the safe use of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
The nerve stimulator delivers a supramaximal, brief, square pulse,
and the response is assessed by various patterns: the train-of-four,
four stimuli at two hertz, is the mainstay,
quantifying non-depolarising block by the fade of the responses and the
train-of-four ratio without a control;
the post-tetanic count gauges very deep block;
and tetanus and double-burst stimulation reveal fade.
Non-depolarising block shows fade and post-tetanic potentiation,
distinguishing it from depolarising block.
The ulnar nerve and adductor pollicis are the standard, conservative site,
and objective measurement — by acceleromyography,
electromyography or mechanomyography — is necessary because the hand cannot detect
fade above a ratio of about zero point four.
The overriding purpose is to confirm recovery to a train-of-four ratio of zero
point nine, excluding the common, dangerous and clinically undetectable residual
block, and to guide reversal with neostigmine or sugammadex.
So neuromuscular monitoring unites the physiology of the neuromuscular junction
with objective measurement to assess and titrate block, distinguish its type,
guide reversal, and above all confirm full recovery — making it an indispensable
standard of care whenever neuromuscular blocking drugs are used.
Describe the construction and features of a peripheral nerve stimulator.
The peripheral nerve stimulator is the device that delivers the electrical
stimulus, and an understanding of its construction and essential features explains
how a reliable, reproducible stimulus is achieved and why certain design features
matter for accurate monitoring.
The stimulator is a battery-powered device delivering current through a pair of
electrodes applied to the skin over the nerve.
A fundamental feature is that it is a constant-current device:
it delivers a set current regardless of the changing resistance of the skin and
tissues, rather than a constant voltage,
because the response of the nerve depends on the current delivered,
and the skin impedance varies; by adjusting its output voltage to maintain the set
current, the constant-current design ensures a reproducible,
supramaximal stimulus despite changes in electrode contact and skin resistance.
The stimulus is a brief, square, monophasic pulse of about zero point two
milliseconds and a current adjustable up to sixty or seventy milliamps.
The electrodes should be silver–silver chloride gel electrodes for good contact,
placed over the nerve with the negative electrode distal,
since the cathode is the more effective stimulating electrode and its distal
placement stimulates the nerve most reliably.
The device should provide the standard patterns — single twitch, train-of-four,
tetanus, post-tetanic count and double-burst — at the correct frequencies and a
supramaximal current, and indicate a fault such as a high impedance or low battery.
So the peripheral nerve stimulator is a battery-powered,
constant-current device that maintains a set current despite varying skin impedance
to give a reproducible supramaximal stimulus;
it delivers a brief square monophasic pulse through gel electrodes with the cathode
placed distally over the nerve, provides the standard stimulation patterns at
correct frequencies, and signals faults such as high impedance or low battery.
What is the margin of safety at the neuromuscular junction,
and its relevance to monitoring?
The margin of safety of neuromuscular transmission is a physiological concept of
direct relevance to the interpretation of neuromuscular monitoring,
because it explains why the evoked response is insensitive to the early stages of
block and why a normal twitch does not exclude substantial receptor blockade.
The neuromuscular junction possesses a considerable margin of safety:
there are many more postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors than are strictly
necessary to generate an end-plate potential large enough to trigger a muscle
action potential, and far more transmitter is released than the minimum required.
As a consequence, a substantial proportion of the receptors — of the order of
seventy to seventy-five per cent — must be blocked by a non-depolarising agent
before the twitch response begins to diminish at all,
and essentially complete transmission is maintained until that threshold is crossed.
The relevance to monitoring is twofold.
First, it means the single twitch and the train-of-four are relatively insensitive
in the early phase of block and during recovery:
the twitch height returns to normal while a significant fraction of receptors,
perhaps up to seventy per cent, remains blocked,
so a recovered twitch height does not exclude residual block — which is precisely
why the train-of-four ratio and fade, rather than twitch height alone,
are needed to detect residual block.
Second, it explains the steepness of the relationship near full block.
Thus the margin of safety underlies the need for sensitive measures of recovery.
So the neuromuscular junction has a large margin of safety,
with excess receptors and transmitter,
so that about seventy to seventy-five per cent of receptors must be blocked before
the twitch falls and the twitch recovers while many receptors remain blocked;
this insensitivity is why twitch height alone cannot exclude residual block and why
the train-of-four ratio and fade are needed to detect it.
Compare the onset and recovery of block at different muscles, and the implications.
The onset and recovery of neuromuscular block differ between muscle groups in a
consistent and clinically useful way,
and understanding this time course explains both how monitoring guides the timing
of intubation and why the site of monitoring matters for confirming recovery.
The centrally located, well-perfused muscles — the diaphragm,
the laryngeal adductors and the other airway muscles — have both a faster onset and
a faster recovery of block than the peripheral muscles such as the adductor
pollicis.
The faster onset at the diaphragm and larynx occurs because their rich blood flow
delivers the drug rapidly, even though they are somewhat resistant and require a
higher concentration; the net effect is that the larynx is paralysed quickly,
which is relevant to the timing of intubation.
The faster recovery means these central muscles regain function earlier than the
peripheral muscles. The implications follow directly.
For timing intubation, monitoring the onset of block — for instance at the facial
nerve, which behaves more like the central muscles,
or simply allowing adequate time — indicates when laryngeal relaxation is
established.
For confirming recovery, the relationship is reversed in usefulness:
because the peripheral adductor pollicis recovers later than the airway and
respiratory muscles, full recovery there guarantees recovery of the more important
central muscles, making it the safe, conservative site; conversely,
monitoring a central-behaving muscle such as the facial would falsely suggest
recovery before the periphery, and so the airway, had truly recovered.
So the central airway muscles, the diaphragm and larynx,
show faster onset and faster recovery than the peripheral adductor pollicis;
the faster central onset guides the timing of intubation,
while the later peripheral recovery makes the adductor pollicis the conservative
site for confirming recovery, since its recovery guarantees that of the airway
muscles.
Describe double-burst stimulation and how it compares with the train-of-four.
Double-burst stimulation is a pattern specifically designed to improve the
detection of residual block by manual, subjective assessment,
and understanding it and its comparison with the train-of-four illustrates the
effort to make fade easier to perceive when objective measurement is unavailable.
Double-burst stimulation consists of two short bursts of high-frequency tetanic
stimulation, each burst comprising three impulses at fifty hertz,
with the two bursts separated by an interval of about seven hundred and fifty
milliseconds.
Each burst is perceived as a single strong muscle contraction,
so the pattern produces two distinct twitches rather than the four of the
train-of-four.
In the presence of residual non-depolarising block,
the second contraction is weaker than the first — fade — and, crucially,
the difference between two strong contractions is easier for the human hand to
detect than the more gradual fade across the four smaller responses of the
train-of-four.
The purpose is therefore to make manual detection of fade,
and so of residual block, more sensitive:
whereas the hand cannot reliably detect train-of-four fade once the ratio exceeds
about zero point four, double-burst stimulation allows fade to be felt up to a
train-of-four ratio of around zero point six,
somewhat improving the detection of residual block.
However, even double-burst stimulation cannot detect fade up to the required ratio
of zero point nine, so it remains inferior to objective measurement and does not
exclude clinically significant residual block.
So double-burst stimulation delivers two bursts of three fifty-hertz impulses,
perceived as two strong twitches; the easier-to-feel difference between them
improves the manual detection of fade,
allowing residual block to be felt up to a ratio of about zero point six rather
than zero point four — better than the train-of-four for manual assessment,
but still inferior to objective measurement and unable to exclude residual block to
a ratio of zero point nine.
How does the train-of-four ratio relate to the clinical milestones of recovery?
The relationship between the measured train-of-four ratio and the recovery of
clinically important functions is the basis for setting the threshold for adequate
recovery, and understanding it explains why a ratio of zero point nine,
rather than a lower value, is required before extubation.
As neuromuscular function recovers,
the train-of-four ratio rises from zero toward one,
and the various functions return at different ratios,
in a sequence that has been characterised. At low ratios the patient is profoundly
weak.
As the ratio rises toward zero point four, gross motor functions begin to return,
and some classic clinical tests such as a brief head-lift may become possible,
but the pharyngeal and upper airway muscles remain significantly impaired,
with discoordinated swallowing and a risk of aspiration,
and the hypoxic ventilatory response is depressed.
At a ratio of about zero point seven, the historical and now-superseded threshold,
tidal volume and vital capacity are largely restored and a sustained head-lift may
be achieved, but careful study showed that pharyngeal function and the hypoxic
ventilatory response remain impaired below zero point nine.
Only at a train-of-four ratio of zero point nine or above are pharyngeal
coordination, airway protection and the hypoxic ventilatory response essentially
restored, which is why this is the accepted threshold for safe extubation.
Clinical tests cannot distinguish a ratio of zero point seven from zero point nine,
so they cannot confirm adequacy.
So as the train-of-four ratio rises, function returns in sequence:
gross movement and a brief head-lift by about zero point four,
tidal volume and a sustained head-lift by about zero point seven,
but pharyngeal coordination, airway protection and the hypoxic ventilatory response
only by zero point nine — which is therefore the required threshold,
undetectable by clinical tests.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Neuromuscular monitoring objectively measures the depth of block by
delivering a SUPRAMAXIMAL, brief square electrical pulse to a peripheral motor
nerve and measuring the evoked muscle response;
its overriding purpose is to confirm full reversal and exclude RESIDUAL block
(common, dangerous, clinically undetectable - airway obstruction, aspiration risk,
impaired ventilation).
Second, The TRAIN-OF-FOUR (four stimuli at 2 Hz) is the mainstay:
in non-depolarising block the responses FADE,
the TOF ratio (4th/1st) quantifying recovery (>=0.9 = adequate) and the TOF count
(4 down to 0) gauging depth - needing no pre-block control;
the post-tetanic count monitors very deep block (no TOF response);
double-burst stimulation makes fade easier to feel.
Third, Non-depolarising block shows FADE and post-tetanic potentiation (block of
presynaptic receptors); normal depolarising (phase-1,
suxamethonium) block shows reduced but EQUAL responses, no fade, no potentiation;
excessive suxamethonium produces a phase-2/dual block that acquires fade.
Fourth, The ULNAR nerve -> adductor pollicis is the standard,
CONSERVATIVE site (peripheral muscles recover later than the resistant
airway/diaphragm muscles, so if adductor pollicis has recovered the airway has
too); the FACIAL nerve resembles airway muscles and OVERESTIMATES recovery -
acceptable for onset/depth but NOT for confirming recovery.
Fifth, Adequate recovery = an OBJECTIVELY measured TOF ratio >=0.9 (subjective
hand/eye assessment cannot detect fade above ~0.4, missing residual block);
objective methods are acceleromyography (thumb acceleration),
electromyography (muscle action potential),
mechanomyography (force) and kinemyography (bending).
Monitoring guides reversal: neostigmine only once >=2-4 TOF responses have returned
(it cannot reverse a deep block); sugammadex dose is set to the measured depth
(post-tetanic count/TOF).
Thank you. That concludes the station.